Review and comments on the Subversion book listed by chapter.

Overall Book Comments

        #1) Blair

            It may be a good idea where possible to set up a little
            example repository for the book.  It could live as

            http://www.svnbook.org/examples/

Chapter 3

        #1) ghudson (also affects ch 9 a little bit)

            The new date parser requires a change to the doc formats.
            A minimal patch can be found in issue #408.

            The new date parser accepts three varieties kinds of
	    formats.  The first is very nicely documented by the W3C
	    in <http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-datetime>; we allow the time
	    zone designator to be missing, in which case we use system
	    local time.  The second variety is just like the first
	    variety, except the punctuation characters '-' and ':' are
	    omitted.  The third variety is what we use in the output
	    of "svn log", and can look like:

              YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm[:ss[.uuuuuu]][ +hh[:mm]]

            There can be fewer than six digits in the microseconds
	    designation, and of course the time zone designation may
	    be "-hh[:mm]" instead of "+hh[:mm]".

    Section svn-ch-3-sect-3.3

        #1) naked

            Possibly mention the obvious pitfall that if the dates on
            revisions are not in order, date lookups will fail
            miserably. This happens when clocks are jumped or cvs2svn
            is used.

    Section svn-ch-3-sect-4.3.1

        #1) naked

            "svn status -u" output has the additional line:

              Status against revision:   9026

            This is not in the examples given. Even though this is
            just a brief introduction, it could be confusing for the
            user to see unexpected output there.

    Section svn-ch-3-sect-5.1

        #1) naked

            In "Why Does svn log Give Me an Empty Response" it is
            said:

              As a result, if you're operating in a subdirectory of
              your working copy and attempt to log a revision where
              nothing beneath your current directory changed,
              Subversion will give you an empty log. If you want to
              see what changed in that revision, try running the same
              command from the top directory of your working copy.

            It is ofcourse not terribly incorrect, but the user may
            become confused when still not getting anything when
            issuing the command at the top of their working copy - if
            the change is outside their entire checked out working
            copy.

    Section svn-ch-3-sect-7.1

        #1) naked

            Working copies do not remain locked anymore after issuing
            Control-C. Fingers crossed and all.

Chapter 5

    Section svn-ch-5-sect-2.1

        #1) naked

            It's almost said but not quite: the text on
            'pre-revprop-change' hook should probably mention the fact
            that revision properties cannot be changed at all unless
            this hook exists :-) This is properly mentioned section
            3.2 however.

    Section svn-ch-5-sect-3.4

	#1) bliss

	    The section on repository recovery could use some text on
	    permission problems.  It's a common problem as admitted in
	    svn-ch-6-sect-5 ("The most common problem").

    Section svn-ch-5-sect-6

        #1) Blair

            I don't know if the "Adding Projects" sections works best
            here.  It follows pretty specific information on setting
            up a repository, debugging, recovering, which are highly
            specific and not generally used.  This section could be
            missed.  This information is also used by people who
            aren't Subversion "administrator's".  For example, at my
            work, there are people creating new projects pretty
            consistently and we have 61 projects.  While I'm the
            administrator, the users and programmers also need to know
            project layout information.

            There's a repository layout section in chapter 4 that this
            could well be merged into.  If that doesn't work, I would
            consider moving it up to the front of this chapter.

Chapter 6

    Section svn-ch-6-sect-5

	#1) bliss

	    The paragraph that begins with "The most common
	    problem..." says that you may need to put all users in a
	    common group and make sure that the repository is wholly
	    owned by that group and that the umask must be correct. It
	    fails to explain that you most likely need to set the
	    group set-ID bit on the directories for this to work.

        #2) bliss

            The name of the section is Using Multiple Servers, but the
            issues discussed are important even if you don't have a
            server at all (i.e. file://) or if you use tunnel mode.
            Some of it is important only when you don't have a server.
            Not terribly important, but the name could be better.
Chapter 7

    Section svn-ch-7-sect-1.3.2

        #1) naked

            When describing the "config" file options "diff" and
            "diff3", should mention that Subversion uses an internal
            diff library nowadays and that these options override that
            with an external program.

    Section svn-ch-7-sect-2

         #1) naked

             I really don't recall what eventually came out of it all,
             but the encoding for properties eludes me. I do remember
             that log messages are UTF8 natively, but does that mean:

               1) log messages are special, only they use encoding
               2) revision properties are special, only they use encoding
               3) all properties use encoding

             And at the moment, I would guess 3). What does that have
             to do with the book then?

             Well, the book talks constantly about how properties can
             even contain binary data - which is not true in any sane
             way if the files are converted from/to UTF8 based on
             locale.

Chapter 8

    Section svn-ch-8-table-1

        #1) naked

            Does not mention 'mod_authz_svn'.

    Section svn-ch-8-sect-2.3

         #1) naked

             The book claims:

               Currently, it is Subversion's Python bindings that are
               the most complete. Some attention is also being given
               to the Java bindings.

             But lately some little birds have been chittering about
             the elevated state of the Perl bindings, so I wonder if
             this is still true.

Chapter 9

    Section svn-ch-9-sect-1.2

        #1) naked

            "svn diff" synopsis differs from actual usage and there is
            no explanation or examples of the --old and --new
            arguments which are bound to be confusing.

        #2) naked

            "svn merge" has the same problem as above.

        #3) naked

            "svn status --show-updates" no longer says:

              Head revision:   981

            but:

              Status against revision:     42

    Section svn-ch-9-sect-2.2
        
        #1) naked

            "svnadmin list-dblogs" and "svnadmin list-unused-dblogs"
            both refer to the section called "svnshell.py" for more
            information. Well, er, um. I could swear some renumbering
            has happened somewhere...

Appendix A

    Section svn-app-a-sect-4

        #1) naked

            Again, "svn status --show-updates" output has changed for
            the final line.
